Hello friends
In this video we will learn how to do the
time and space complexity and analysis of loops
Here we have an example algorithm with a single for
loop
The first statement here is int i and sum = 0
which is a simple statement and hence it
will take only one unit of time
Next we have for i=1 and i<=n, i++
And how many iterations will this loop have Let us
suppose n equal to 3 then the for loop condition
will be true for i=1
i=2 and i=3 and for i = 4
When the condition is checked it will fail so total
n+1 times this will be executed and n times
the condition will be true and the next time it
will fail And the statement inside the for loop will
execute only n times
In the n+1 iteration the for Loop condition
fails and control will come out
So this inner  statement sum = sum+i
will be executed only end times and finally we
have the return sum statement which will take one unit
of time
So total time taken by this programme T of X
equal to 1+n+1+n+1
one that is T of X equal to 2n+3
That is if n=1
The total time will be 2n+3
which is five units and if n = 5 then
the total time taken will be to 2*5+3
which is 13 units
So time taken depends on the input value the small
other input the lesser the time taken
But how do we say that time complexity Here
See here we have a polynomial expression
And if we have a polynomial expression like
this in general we will take the largest exponents
That is the degree of the polynomial as
the time complexity
And here the largest exponant and power one
So the complexity is order of N what about
the space complexity Here we have n taking one unit
of memory Then we have I and some also requiring
one unit each and we don't have any other memory
requirements in this programme
So the total memory required S of X equal to one
plus one plus one equals 3 which is a constant
So the space complexity is order of one
Now let us take another example algorithm which takes a
one dimensional array as input
First let us find the time complexity
The first statement will take one unit time and next
we have the for Loop
And how many iterations will it have Let us suppose add
equal to three
Then the for Loop condition will be true for equal
to 0,1 and 2 and for equal to three
When the condition is checked it will fail so total
n+1 one times this will be executed
n times the for loop condition will be true and
the next time it will fail
And the statement inside the for Loop will execute only
n times
That is when the for Loop condition is true
The statement inside will be executed in the n+1
iteration of the for loop the condition will fail
and control will come out
So this inner statement sum = sum + arr[i]
of i will be executed only n times and finally
we have the return statement which will also take one
unit of time
So the total time taken T of X equal to
1+(n+1)+n+1 that is
T of X equal to 2n+3
And as we just learnt we have to take the
degree of this polynomial expression and we will get
the time complexity as order of n
So that was the time complexity
Now let us discuss about the space complexity
Firstly we have functioned parameters arr and n
arr is an array of size n so it will take
n units of memory and there is a variable n
and it will also take one unit of memory
So total n+1  Next we have the variables
i and sum which will require one unit of memory
each and that all
So so the total memory taken here S of X equal
to n+1+1+1 that is
n+3 again
It is a polynomial
So what do we do We find a degree and
it is one
So the space complexity is order of n in now in
the same code
Let us take one more for loop and analyse it
space and time complexities
So for this new loop for i = 0, i>n
and i++ it will also have n
plus one executions n times the condition will be true
and one time it will fail
So this will be executed n+1 times
Now what about the in a statement It will be
executed only when the for loop condition is true
That is n times
So the total time taken here will be n unit
So the total time taken is
1+(n+1)+n+(n+1)+n+1
one that is 4n+4
But again if you say the degree of polynomial is
still 1 So the time complexity is order of
n again now what about the space complex city For
this loop it will not take any more memory units
because there are no new variables or anything
So the space complexity will also remain the same
So what can we conclude from this example Say we
can observe that having a separate loop doesn't make any
major impact on the time complexity so if an algorithm
has n separate loops
Then the loop which takes largest time will be the
time complexity of the algorithm
Now say another example
Here we have a two dimensional area and a nested
for Loop so let us find the time complexity
First the four statement will take just one unit of
time and next we have the for Loop
And how many iterations will it have we have for
i=0 , i<n, i++, so
it will have total n iterations
That is if n =3 ,the condition will
be true for i = 0,
i=1 and 1=2
And for i=3 condition will fail
So including the failed case check total n+1
times this will be executed
And what about inner statements We have a
loop inside first and it will be executed whenever the
outer Loop condition is true
That is n times
So n times this will be executed for i=0,
i=1 and i=2 upto i=n
to an each time
How many iterations will it have It will have iterations
for j=0,j=1,j=2 upto n
that is n times the condition will be true
And one time that is for the n+1
time it will fail so total n+1 times
this will be executed and it will be executed for
n times by the outer loop so total n * (n+1)
Now what about this Inner most statement it will
be executed whenever the inner loop condition is true
That is n times  and n times
The outer loop will execute the inner loop and n
times
The inner loop will be true
So n*n times this statement will be executed
So n*n  will be the time taken by
this statement
And the final return statement will take one unit time
So total time taken will be T of X equal to
1+(n+1)+n*(n+1)+n*n+1
that is
1+n+1+n*n, n square
plus n*1+n*n, n square +1
that is 2n square +2n+3
So it's a polynomial expression and what do
we do now We find the degree and here we
have n raise to 2 and n raise to 1
So 2 is the degree so the time complexity will
be order of n square
So if n=2  total time is 4 and
if an equal to 5 total time is 25 units
now that was the time complexity
Now what about the space complexity Here we have a
two dimensional array so it will have n rows and
n columns so it requires an n*n memory units
that is n square memory units
Then we have n which will take one unit
And then we have i,j and sum each requiring one
unit of memory
So the total memory required a S of X
n square+1+1+1+1 that
is n square+4 again
It's a polynomial and we have the degree to so
the space complex area will be equal to order of
n square
Now see another example
Here we have it two dimensional array and nested triple
for loop
Find the time complexity of this algorithm
First the first statement will take just one unit of
time
Next we have the fur loop
And how many iteration
Will it have We have the outermost loop for i=0
i<n, i++
So it will have total and n iterations
That is if n=3 the condition will be
true for i=0,i=1 and i=2
And when i equal to 3 the condition will fail
So total n+1 times this will be executed
And what about this inner statements all these statements
inside will be executed whenever the outer loop condition is
true
That is n times
So n times all these will be executed that is
for i equal to 012 upto n inside first
We have a for Loop
And how many iterations will it have It will have
iterations for j=0,j=1,
j=2,
up to j=n-1 when j=n
it will fail that is n times
the condition will be true
And one time that is for the n+1
time it will fail
So total n+1 times this will be executed
and it will be executed for n times by the
outer loop
So total n*(n+1)
And what about the statements inside the second for loop
it will be executed
When the second for loop condition is true
That is n times and inside we have a for
loop
And how many iterations will it have It will have
n iterations That is four k=0 k=1 ,
k=2,upto k=n-1
and for k=n The condition will fail
That is n times the condition will be true
And for the n+1 time the condition will
fail
So total n+1 times this will be executed
and it will be executed for n times by the
second for loop and n times by the outermost for
loop so total n*n*(n+1)
times
Now what about this inner most statement it will
be executed whenever the innermost loop condition is true
Thatis n times so n times the outermost loop will
execute the inner loop and n times that inner loop
will be true and it executes the innermost loop and
n times
It will be true
Just as we discussed so n*n*n
times
This statement will be executed
Now The final returns statement will take one unit time
so total time taken will be t of x equal
to 1+(n+1)+n*n(n+1)+
n*n*(n+1)+n*n*n+1
that is
1+n+1+n square+n+n cube
plus n square+ n cube+1
that is
2n cube + 2n square + 2n +3
And again it's a polynomial expression
So what do we do We find the degree and
here we have n Cube n Square and n raise to
one
So three is the degree here so we can say
the time complexity of this algorithm is order of
n cube
So that was the time complexity Now what about the
space complexity Here we have a 2d array
So it will have n Rows and n columns so it
requires n*n memory units that is n square
memory unit
Then we have n which will require one unit of
memory
And then we have I J K and some each
requiring one unit of memory
So total memory required is n square plus 5 again
it is a polynomial
So if we find the degree and we got degree
equal to 2 here so space complexity of this algorithm
is order of n square
So that is how we can find the time and
space complexities of algorithms with loops
And we understood that the time complexity of a loop
is actually equal to the number of times the inner
most statement is to be executed
That is in the last example we so that the
innermost statement executed n*n*n times and
hence we got the time complexity order of n cube
And even if you have separate loops in your algorithm
it really doesn't make a major impact on the time
complexity
And if you have n separate loops
The loop which takes the largest time will be the
time complexity of the whole algorithm
For example if your algorithm has a simple four loop
and a nested triple for look then the time complexity
of that algorithm will be order of n cube